Add object status used to indicate lost or nonexistent objects (#429)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

IDs starts at 0, increasing sequentially for each object within the
group.

> * Object Send Order: An integer indicating the object send order

Reviewer: pls keep

> {{send-order}} or priority {{ordering-by-priorities}} value.

Author: Don't remove send order

Author: @kixelated - I will fix this not to remove it.

object. The preferences are Track, Group, Object and Datagram.  An Object MUST
be sent according to its `Object Forwarding Preference`, described below.

> * Object Status: As enumeration used for missing or dropped objects that

Reviewer: IMO this status would only be sent in `OBJECT_DROPPED` on a separate stream,

>   indicates why data is missing.

Reviewer 2: s/ojects/objects.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to added in the canonical object definition as well. As this will be along with the object in the cache.

Author: I tried to make the cache or not very explicit in new version. I think it resolves this.

> * Object Payload: An opaque payload intended for the consumer and SHOULD

Reviewer 3: Since most objects are not dropped or missing, the vast majority of the time we will be embedding a 0x0 byte for no reason. Since in all identified dropped or issuing situations the payload is 0, can we structure the header such that if a payload length of 0 is declared, then the next field carries the Object Status instead of the payload?

Author: I like that idea. For the control messages, I don't care about saving a byte but for the audio data, it makes a big difference.

Author: Added this in

NOT be processed by a relay.

There is also a status field which help subscribers understand what
objects it will not receive due to then being dropped, lost, or never be
produced including the case where they will not be produced because they
are beyond the end of a group or track. Every object has an associated
`Status` that can have following values:

> * 0x0 := Object exists at the publisher and payload is non-null array of

Reviewer 2: i wonder if it helps to not have status 0x0 and having payload length of non-zero for the object in the cache is a proof of existence ??

We definitely need a way to mark if a publisher drops an object or decides not to produce at all ... which i believe are covered by other status values

> * 0x0 := Object exists at the publisher and payload is non-null array of

Reviewer: "object exists" is very strange.

Doesn't this status code just mean that the message contains a payload? Can we just state that?

> * 0x0 := Object exists at the publisher and payload is non-null array of

Author: changed this to "normal"  - perhaps there is a better name. I think we will do need the 00 code because in same cases you don't have an explicit payload length to decide to send this or not. Check it out in next version of PR.

         bytes.

> * 0x1 := Object non existent at the publisher and has zero sized

Reviewer 4: Should we reference caching here?  It seems like both 1 and 2 are cacheable, because they won't change, but 3 and 4 are not?

Reviewer 2: I think 3/4 are also cacheable esp when serving chain of relays. A downstream relay, if it has a knowledge of object status (as expired), can satisfy fetch request by requesting upstream.

Reviewer 5: I think we should either declare those non-cacheable, or have a flag in FETCH that says "refetch everything dropped at a relay", otherwise DVR/clipping use cases might not work.

Reviewer 2: if this goes along with cached object and fetch happens for a object that has status other than 0x0, relay can issue fetch upstream.  Having it stored along with object be useful, isn't it ?

>          payload. Sent by the media producer and sent to indicate that

Reviewer: What's the difference between status code = 0x1 and a payload of size 0? Do we need this status code at all?

Author: Tried to clarify this. Part of the issue was can a normal object ( status code 0 ) have a zero length payload. I do not see any reason not to allow this. It makes it clear it is not "missing" but it just has no data. I think Alan had a use case for this. Check out next version of PR and see if it seems clearer on all this.

         the given object identified by the Object Id doesn't exist for

>          the reasons specific to the producer.

Reviewer: (also the payload is empty in this case)

> * 0x2 := Group non existent. Sent by a publisher and indicates the group

Reviewer: Why not send a group with a single (FIN) object of size 0?

> * 0x2 := Group non existent. Sent by a publisher and indicates the group

Author: Changed to be more or less what Luke suggest.

         identified by the groupId doesn't exist at the producer. This
         is the only message sent on the unidirectional stream when
         using Stream per group and Stream per object forwarding

>          preference.

Reviewer: (also the payload is empty in this case)

> * 0x3 := Object dropped at the relay. Sent by a relay indicating the

Reviewer: Do we really care which hop dropped the object? A subscriber really only needs to know if it can retry.

There's currently no way of signaling that a publisher dropped an object due to flow control, but it's retryable.

         object identified by the ObjectId was dropped. The payload will

>          be empty in this case.

Reviewer 3: We're signaling that we dropped an object by creating another object and sending that in its place. Is the belief that the removal of the payload will always ensure that this "message object" gets through, or need we deal with a condition in which this message object is delayed to the point that it is dropped too? At that point, do we send a placeholder object for the placeholder object for the real object?

* 0x4 := Group dropped at the relay. Sent by a relay indicating the
         group identified by the GroupId was dropped. The payload will
         be empty in this case.

> 

Reviewer 6: The interaction with resetting the streams that carry these messages needs to be clarified.  Let's assume stream-per-group, and the sender has attempted to send several objects, but not all data is acked.  It then wants to drop the group, and cease retransmission of not-needed objects.  However, if it needs to write the drop marker into the same stream, it needs to continue retransmitting the objects in the group.

Also, we should specify what Object ID to use here in the case there is not a specific object ID when the relay wants to, say, tail drop the group.

> * 0x5 := Indicates end of group. ObjectId identifies the largest object

Reviewer: IMO this should be a separate flag/message. `TRACK_FIN` and/or `GROUP_FIN` maybe.

         produced in the group identified by the GroupID. This is sent
         right after the last object in the group and on the same
         stream. If the group is dropped there will only one message

>          with this status for the group.

Reviewer 6: It's slightly awkward to use this wire encoding, since I might know object 10 is the last object in the group, and I send:

```
OBJECT g=x, id=10, status=0, payload
OBJECT g=x, id=10, status=END_OF_GROUP
```

Reviewer 4: It would be nice to be able to send:

`OBJECT` g=x, id=10, status=END_OF_GROUP, payload

Reviewer 6: It's also possible the publisher doesn't know that object 10 is the end of the group when it's published.

Reviewer 2: My proposal is to remove status 0x0 .. since its redundant when payload length is > 0.
If we do that, then above will be simplified to following for marking end of the group
```
OBJECT g=x, id=10, status=END_OF_GROUP
```
where object id 10 is the largest group.

Reviewer: IMO this should be a separate flag. `OBJECT_FIN` perhaps. 

Otherwise yeah it's confusing to sometimes receive a second OBJECT on a stream. Also it currently can't be encoded because OBJECT doesn't contain an explicit size (when per-stream).

Reviewer: But I do like using a second message, because it means you don't have to know if it's the last object prior to transmitting it. I would just put it on a separate (reliable) stream like drop messages.

For example, encoders spit out P-frames and we can immediately send it as an OBJECT. Only when an encoder crates an I-frame (not predictable) then we can end the current group. There's no latency added.

An alternative is to have the object contains a "last of group/track" flag, but 
that requires buffering 1 frame and adds additional latency.

* 0x6 := Indicates end of track. GroupID and ObjectId identifies the

>          largest group and object produced in this track. This is sent

Reviewer 6: Does the end-of-track imply end-of-group?

Reviewer 6: This is an important message and we need to clarify the stream reset semantics here as well.

Reviewer 2: end of track must imply end of the last group in the track

         right after the last object in the track and on the same
         stream. If the group is dropped there will only one message

>          with this status for the group.

Reviewer 6: I think this is copypasta from above?

Author: oops

> 

Reviewer 7: "Any other value for status is a malformed message"

Author: made a protocol error in next version of PR

object. The preferences are Track, Group, Object and Datagram.  An Object MUST
be sent according to its `Object Forwarding Preference`, described below.

> * Object Status: As enumeration used to indicated missing or dropped

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Object Status: As enumeration used to indicated missing
```

object. The preferences are Track, Group, Object and Datagram.  An Object MUST
be sent according to its `Object Forwarding Preference`, described below.

> * Object Status: As enumeration used for missing or dropped objects that

Reviewer 4: This it can also signal GROUP_END and TRACK_END.

  indicates why data is missing.

* Object Payload: An opaque payload intended for the consumer and SHOULD
NOT be processed by a relay.

> There is also a status field which help subscribers understand what

Reviewer 4: The status has a wider set of functionality than just drops and gaps.

Can you clarify that all status values except 0x0 do not have any payload?

objects it will not receive due to then being dropped, lost, or never be
produced including the case where they will not be produced because they
are beyond the end of a group or track. Every object has an associated
`Status` that can have following values:

> * 0x0 := Normal object. The payload is array of bytes and can by empty.

Reviewer 4: This is only a valid value for OBJECT_STREAM, correct?

Author: I'm struggling how to phrase this.  I was thinking  of the obj formats could have an empty payload.

* 0x1 := Indicates Object does not exist. Indicates that this object
         does not exist at any publisher and it will not be published in
         the future. This SHOULD be cached.

* 0x2 := Indicates Group does not exist. Indicates that objects with
         this GroupID do not exist at any publisher and they will not be
         published in the future. This SHOULD be cached.

* 0x3 := Indicates end of Group. ObjectId is one greater that the
         largest object produced in the group identified by the

>          GroupID. This is sent right after the last object in the

Reviewer 4: Yes, I added a MUST about this below.

>          GroupID. This is sent right after the last object in the

Reviewer 6: > This is sent right after the last object

Can this be a MUST, at least for Forwarding Preference = Group?

         group. This SHOULD be cached.

> * 0x4 := Indicates end of Track and Group. GroupID is one greater than

Author: Lets say group had three object 0 to 2. And 2 is dropped. I was thinking what is sent is 0, 1 , then message with status code that indicated 2 was dropped, then message with status code that indicates obj 3 would be end of group marker.

         the largest group produced in this track and the ObjectId is
         one greater than the largest object produced in that
         group. This is sent right after the last object in the
         track. This SHOULD be cached.

> * 0x5 := Indicates Object was dropped at a relay. Sent by a relay

Author: Removed in next version

         indicating some of the objects in the group identified by the
         GroupId were dropped. The Object ID is one greater than last
         object sent and MAY be zero. This SHOULD NOT be cached.

Open Issue: We could make end of track and end of group just be a status
set on the last object sent on the group or track. This would mean the
status could no longer optional and only occur when the payload length
was zero as it would be needed in non zero length packets. It would also
have the issue that when a P frame is produced, the software getting
data from the decoder often does not know if it is the last P frame
until the next frame is encoded and the software gets an I frame. We do
not want a solution where we add a whole frame of latency on the encoder
waiting for next frame so it can set the end of group field on the last
last object in the group.

Any other value SHOULD be treated as a protocol error and terminate the
session with a Protocol Violation ({{session-termination}}).

There are times where some of the status information is redundant with
information learned at the lower layer. For example, when using stream

> per object, the end of Group is redundant.

Author: oops - changed as you sugested

* Object Payload: An opaque payload intended for the consumer and SHOULD
NOT be processed by a relay.

> * Object Status: As enumeration used to indicated missing

Reviewer 6: indicate

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Object Status: As enumeration used to indicate missing
```

>   objects and as an marker of the end of group or track.

Reviewer 6: s/and as an marker/or mark/ ?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  objects or mark the end of a group or track.
```

> The Object Status lets subscribers understand what objects will not be received

Reviewer 6: s/lets subscribers understand/informs subscribers/

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Object Status informs subscribers what objects will not be received
```

because they were never produced, are no longer available, or because they
are beyond the end of a group or track.

> `Status` that can have following values:

Reviewer 6: remove 'that' ?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`Status` can have following values:
```

> * 0x0 := Normal object. The payload is array of bytes and can be empty.

Reviewer 6: Given this is in the canonical object part, and payload has already been defined above, maybe it's more clear to define Status first, then in Object Payload state that this property is only present when Status is Normal Object.

Reviewer 4: SGTM

Reviewer 4: Ok, I created a separate section, I think this looks ok now.

  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Object Send Order (i),

>   Object Status (i),

Reviewer 4: I assumed we were doing that on a separate stream?

>   Object Status (i),

Author: I'm not following the problem here. There would be no change from what we have today in figuring out legth of message.

{
  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),

>   Object Status (i),

Reviewer: A lot of these end statuses become redundant when not using a stream per object. I think it's fine but needs to be called out.

To send an Object with `Object Forwarding Preference` = `Track`, find the open
stream that is associated with the subscription, or open a new one and send the
`STREAM_HEADER_TRACK` if needed, then serialize the following object fields.
The Object Status field is only sent if the Object Payload Length is zero.

~~~
{
  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Object Payload Length (i),

>   [Object Status (i)],

Reviewer: What happens if we get a stream FIN without status 0x4. Is that a fatal error or is it implicit?

Author: I don't think this changes what a FIN means in any way and I would not want to use these group and end markers in all cases. For applications where they make sense ( like streaming video ) they can can be used. For applications where they make no sense ( like audio only ) the publisher would not bother.

stream that is associated with the subscription, `Group ID` and `Object
Send Order`, or open a new one and send the `STREAM_HEADER_GROUP` if needed,
then serialize the following fields.
The Object Status field is only sent if the Object Payload Length is zero.

~~~
{
  Object ID (i),
  Object Payload Length (i),

>   [Object Status (i)],

Reviewer: What happens if we get a stream FIN without status 0x3? Is that a fatal error or can we use it as an implicit signal?

Reviewer: I'd like it to be implicit, or banned.

Reviewer: Actually can we remove this for now? Every status is redundant and confusing with this encoding.

0x1: Implies there can be gaps in group streams which I don't want to support. And if we did end up supporting it, intentional gaps can be detected via the sequence numbers.

0x2: Should be in the group stream header (or separate message). Using the first object to indicate the entire group is skipped is really confusing and error prone. Also I don't like intentional gaps in groups but that's a separate issue.

0x3: Conflicts with STREAM FIN. It can only create problems unless we allow multiple streams per group, but that's counterproductive.

0x4: Should be in the group header (or a separate message). Conflicts with SUBSCRIBE_END since it can indicate the end of the track too.

Author: Sam thing, status 0x3 is optional, this PR does not change what a FIN does or does not mean.
